
GIT BASICS 
What is Git? 
Git  is  a distributed  version control  system (VCS)  that  is  widely  used  for tracking  changes  in 
source code during software development. It was created by Linus Torvalds in 2005 and has since 
become the de facto standard for version control in the software development industry. 
Git  allows  multiple developers to collaborate  on a  project by providing  a  history  of  changes, 
facilitating the tracking of who made what changes and when. Here are some key concepts and 
features of Git: 
1. Repository (Repo): A Git repository is a directory or storage location where your project's 
files and version history are stored. There can be a local repository on your computer and 
remote repositories on servers. 
2. Commits: In Git, a commit is a snapshot of your project at a particular point in time. Each 
commit includes a unique identifier, a message describing the changes, and a reference to the 
previous commit. 
3. Branches: Branches in Git allow you to work on different features or parts of your project 
simultaneously  without  affecting  the  main  development  line  (usually  called  the  "master" 
branch). Branches make it easy to experiment, develop new features, and merge changes back 
into the main branch when they are ready. 
4. Pull Requests (PRs): In Git-based collaboration workflows, such as GitHub or GitLab, pull 
requests are a way for developers to propose changes and have them reviewed by their peers. 
This is a common practice for open-source and team-based projects. 
5. Merging: Merging involves combining changes from one branch (or multiple branches) into 
another. When a branch's changes are ready to be incorporated into the main branch, you can 
merge them. 
6. Remote  Repositories: Remote repositories are copies  of  your project stored  on a different 
server.  Developers  can  collaborate  by  pushing  their  changes  to  a  remote  repository  and 
pulling changes from it. Common remote repository hosting services include GitHub, GitLab, 
and Bitbucket. 
7. Cloning:  Cloning  is  the  process  of  creating  a  copy  of  a  remote  repository  on  your  local 
machine. This allows you to work on the project and make changes locally. 
8. Forking: Forking is a way to create your copy of a repository, typically on a hosting platform 
like GitHub. You can make changes to your fork without affecting the original project and 
later create pull requests to contribute your changes back to the original repository. 
 
 What is Version Control System (VCS)? 
A Version Control System (VCS), also commonly referred to as a Source Code Management 
(SCM) system, is a software tool  or system that helps manage  and track changes to files and 
directories over time. The primary purpose of a VCS is to keep a historical record of all changes 
made to a set of files, allowing multiple people to collaborate on a project while maintaining the 
integrity of the codebase. 
 There are two main types of VCS: centralized and distributed. 
Centralized Version Control Systems (CVCS): In a CVCS, there is a single central repository 
that stores all  the  project  files and their  version  history. Developers  check  out  files  from this 
central repository, make changes, and then commit those changes back to the central repository. 
Examples of CVCS include CVS (Concurrent Versions System) and Subversion (SVN). 



Distributed Version Control Systems (DVCS): In a DVCS, every developer has a complete 
copy of the project's repository, including  its full  history, on their local machine. This allows 
developers to  work  independently,  create  branches  for experimentation,  and synchronize their 
changes with remote repositories. Git is the most well-known and widely used DVCS, but other 
DVCS options include Mercurial and Bazaar. 
 Git Installation 
To install Git on your computer, you can follow the steps for your specific operating system: 
1. Installing Git on Windows: 
a. Using Git for Windows (Git Bash): 
• Go to the official Git for Windows website: https://gitforwindows.org/ 
• Download the latest version of Git for Windows. 
• Run the installer and follow the installation steps. You can choose the default settings 
for most options. 
 b. Using GitHub Desktop (Optional): 
• If  you  prefer  a  graphical  user  interface (GUI) for  Git,  you  can  also  install  GitHub 
Desktop, which includes Git. Download it from https://desktop.github.com/ and follow the 
installation instructions. 
To download 
 https://git-scm.com/download/win 
 2. Installing Git from Source (Advanced): 
• If you prefer to compile Git from source, you can download the source code from the 
official Git website (https://git-scm.com/downloads) and follow the compilation instructions 
provided there. This is usually only necessary for advanced users. 
 After  installation,  you  can open a terminal or  command prompt  and  verify that  Git  is 
correctly installed by running the following command: 
$ git --version 
If Git is installed successfully, you will see the Git version displayed in the terminal. You can 
now start using Git for version control and collaborate on software development projects. 
 
 Git Commands List 
Git  is a popular version control system used for tracking changes in software development 
projects. Here's a list of common Git commands along with brief explanations: 
 1. git init: Initializes a new Git repository in the current directory. 
2. git  clone  <repository URL>:  Creates  a  copy  of  a  remote  repository  on  your  local 
machine. 
3. git add <file>: Stages a file to be committed, marking it for tracking in the next commit. 
4. git commit -m "message": Records the changes you've staged with a descriptive commit 
message. 



5. git  status:  Shows the status of  your  working directory  and the  files  that  have  been 
modified or staged. 
6. git log: Displays a log of all previous commits, including commit hashes, authors, dates, 
and commit messages. 
7. git diff: Shows the differences between the working  directory and  the  last  committed 
version. 
8. git branch: Lists all branches in the repository and highlights the currently checked-out 
branch. 
9. git branch <branchname>: Creates a new branch with the specified name. 
10. git checkout <branchname>: Switches to a different branch. 
11. git merge <branchname>: Merges changes from the specified branch into the currently 
checked-out branch. 
12. git pull:  Fetches  changes  from a  remote repository and  merges them  into the current 
branch. 
13. git push: Pushes your local commits to a remote repository. 
14. git remote: Lists the remote repositories that your local repository is connected to. 
15. git fetch: Retrieves changes from a remote repository without merging them. 
16. git reset <file>: Unstages a file that was previously staged for commit. 
17. git reset --hard  <commit>:  Resets  the branch  to  a specific commit,  discarding  all 
changes after that commit. 
18. git stash: Temporarily  saves  your  changes  to  a "stash" so  you  can switch  branches 
without committing or losing your work. 
19. git tag: Lists and manages tags (usually used for marking specific points in history, like 
releases). 
20. git blame <file>: Shows who made each change to a file and when. 
21. git rm <file>: Removes a file from both your working directory and the Git repository. 
22. git mv <oldfile> <newfile>: Renames a file and stages the change. 
 These are some of the most common Git commands, but Git offers a wide range of features 
and options for more advanced usage. You can use git --help followed by the command name 
to get more information about any specific command, e.g., git help commit.


